---
title: Are You an Active or a Passive Investor?
---

If you have read the Intelligent Investor or other books by Ben Graham you will
know the importance of knowing what kind of investor you are. Ben Graham also
tells us that there is no mid-point; you can’t successfully be a semi active
investor as this will more likely produce inferior results than if you were
simply a passive investor.

In a very simplistic sense, active investors are those who aim to over perform
the market indexes by spending a significant amount of their time doing
Intelligent  “Security Analysis”, passive investors on the other hand are those
of us that can’t or don’t have the time to individually analyze securities and
thus prefer safety of principal and an average return.

I followed two simple rules of thumb to help me determine whether I had the time
and could acquire the knowledge to become and active investor.

* Do you have enough time and are you willing to read over and understand the 
annual reports of the companies you hold or will hold?

* Active Investing is a full time job; can you dedicate a minimum of 6 – 8 
hours daily towards investing?

If your answer is no to any of the previous questions then you should decide to
follow a passive investment path. (These are only my opinions)

Being a passive investor does not mean you can’t enjoy the intellectual
challenge of picking stocks and valuing companies, however you have to always
remember that you are doing it for the challenge or for the fun itself and not
in an straight investment basis, Ben Graham suggests allocating a small portion
of your capital (< 10%) towards this kind of endeavors, think of it like going
to a casino with the odds a bit in your favor.

What about capital allocation for Investment grade activities?

Ben Graham Suggests a simple 50 – 50 capital allocation distributed equally over
stocks and bonds at most times. However he mentions that under certain favorable
circumstances a 75 – 25 divisions might be justifiable e.g. buying more stocks
after unjustifiable low prices following a recession.

Hope this helps some. I always considered I had enough time to analyze
individual stocks but it proved to be extremely time consuming very rewarding
Yes!, but also very time consuming and

Remember: you can't be a semi-active investor! You can try :)
