---
title: 'LateX: Resume and Professional Profile Templates'
layout: post
---

So I have been using [LaTeX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LaTeX) for a while
for all of my papers and formal documents. I really think it is a great way to
create professional looking documents.

#### Why use LaTeX?

For the most part in LaTeX you only need to focus on working on the content of
your document and providing a couple of typesetting instructions for TeX to
interpret. Tex then takes these instructions, formats your document accordingly
and generates a professional looking document for you. The beauty of LaTeX over
other _What you see is what you get_
([WYSIWYG](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WYSIWYG)) programs (e.g. Word ...etc)
is that you don't have to deal with the looks of the document, you simply need
to provide instructions for the typesetting engine to interpret. It is a really
nice concept once you get used to it.

These are other great advantages to LaTeX (I will keep adding more as time goes
by):

* It is free and open source.

* It runs on most operating systems.

* You can add revision control to your documents to keep track of changes and 
revert back to previous versions easily.

* LaTeX handles mathematical expressions and formulas very well.

* You can program and define your own commands. For example if you want the 
document to look a certain way (e.g. your resume or CV), or if you want to 
automate the process.

#### Professional Document Templates

Now to the substance of this post, not long ago I needed to update my resume and
so I went ahead and opened my old resume in open office and of course the
formatting was all off (it was created in Word) arrgh :( . So I decided it was
finally time to create my professional documents using LaTeX.

So I went ahead and created a template that I can keep reusing for my resume and
my professional profile. It actually works surprisingly well and my documents
look way better than what I was able to accomplish with Word (I know, I know
maybe I am a bit biased ;) ).

#### Where to get the Resume Templates?

I created a [Github repository](https://github.com/camilotejeiro/professional_document_templates) 
with a couple of example documents so that you can see the templates at work. 
Feel free to clone the repo and use the templates to craft your own documents.

You can also look at my [professional documents]({% link about.md %}) 
to see what the templates can do for you.

I hope it helps.

Cheers,
