---
title: Changing the Economics of Open Source
---

please note: We are referring to open source as the general set of open
technologies (open source, open hardware, open access ...etc) for more info
[read the FAQ.](http://camilotejeiro.github.io/osohm_website)

Is it possible that in our future, we can have consumer products where the
underlying hardware and software are fully open?

Perhaps, but as it stands today, there is no economic incentive for the
suppliers of technology to adopt this path.

Today, the development of consumer products is largely based on keeping the
intellectual property proprietary (IP is where the value is) and mass
manufacturing copies of the consumer goods we all use (copies are inexpensive).
Naturally in economics every party in a negotiation is seeking to maximize their
return and over the years this model has been carefully tailored towards
maximizing the revenue of suppliers.

But what about the consumers of technology?

For an efficient economic outcome, in aggregate, consumers of technology must be
able to negotiate on equal terms with suppliers to be able to maximize their
utility. But for this to be possible consumers must have accurate and honest
information about the items they are purchasing.

Unfortunately, An efficient outcome for the economy as a whole is not always the
optimal outcome for the individual. One way to tilt the balance towards a better
outcome for suppliers is by purposely misinforming consumers about the products
they are purchasing. Normally this is done by advertising greater value for
products (i.e. in the consumer mind) upon the basis of visual appearance, brands
and other intangibles andÂ  leaving the necessary information (technical
specifications, implementation details ...etc) out of reach. Therefore consumers
continuously engage in unhealthy over spending habits and wasteful consumption
(with the environment consequences this carries) for the economic benefit of
suppliers.

But this can change, open technologies can grow to become our standard for
consumer products only if, we as consumers start demanding honest and accurate
information about the products we purchase, and we start valuing/purchasing
technology for what it is: applied science and not magic.

> It is through our collective use and financial support of open
> products, that we can contribute towards making of open technology a requirement
> and not an option.

Until then, we will work to facilitate the progress in this direction.

{% include issues_comments.md %}
